---
title: 'Morning Prayer'
taxonomy:
    category:
        - docs
---



First Prayer of St. Basil the Great

Almighty Lord, God of the Powers and of all flesh, Who livest in the
highest and carest for the humble, Who searchest our hearts and
affections, and clearly foreknowest the secrets of men; eternal and
everliving Light, in Whom is no change nor shadow of variation; O
Immortal King, receive our prayers which at the present time we offer to
Thee from unclean lips, trusting in the multitude of Thy mercies.
Forgive all sins committed by us in thought, word or deed, consciously
or unconsciously, and cleanse us from all defilement of flesh and
spirit. Grant us to pass the night of the whole present life with
wakeful heart and sober thought, ever expecting the coming of the
radiant day of the appearing of Thy only-begotten Son, our Lord and God
and Saviour, Jesus Christ, when the Judge of all will come with glory to
render to each according to their deeds. May we not be found fallen and
idle, but awake and alert for action, ready to accompany Him into the
joy and divine palace of His glory, where there is the ceaseless sound
of those keeping festival and the unspeakable delight of those who
behold the ineffable beauty of Thy Face. For Thou art the true Light
that enlightens and sanctifies all, and all creation sings to Thee
throughout the ages. Amen.

Second Prayer of St. Basil the Great

We bless Thee, O most high God and Lord of mercy, Who art ever doing
numberless great and inscrutable things with us, glorious and wonderful;
Who grantest to us sleep for rest from our infirmities, and repose from
the burdens of our much toiling flesh. We thank Thee that Thou hast not
destroyed us with our sins, but hast loved us as ever, and though we are
sunk in despair, Thou hast raised us up to glorify Thy power. Therefore
we implore Thy incomparable goodness, enlighten the eyes of our
understanding and raise up our mind from the heavy sleep of indolence;
open our mouth and fill it with Thy praise, that we may be able
undistracted to sing and confess Thee, Who art God glorified in all and
by all, the eternal Father, with Thy only-begotten Son, and Thy all-holy
and good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
Amen.

Midnight Song to the Most Holy Mother of God

I sing thy grace, O Sovereign Lady, and pray to thee to grace my mind.
Teach me to step right in the way of Christ's commandments. Strengthen
me to keep awake in song and dispel the dream of despondency. Release
me, bound with bonds of sin, O bride of God, by thy prayers. Guard me by
night and also by day, and drive away my foes who defeat me. O Bearer of
God, the Giver of Life, enliven me who am deadened by passions. O bearer
of the unfailing Light, enlighten my blinded soul. O Marvellous Palace
of the Master, make me a house of the Divine Spirit. O Mother of the
Healer, heal the perennial passions of my soul. Guide me to the path of
repentance, for I am tossed in the storm of life. Deliver me from
eternal fire, from wicked war and from hell. Expose me guilty as I am of
many sins. Renew me, grown old from senseless sins, O most Immaculate
One. Present me untouched by all torments, and pray for me to the Lord
of all. Grant me to receive the joys of Heaven with all the Saints. O
most holy Virgin, hear the voice of thy unprofitable servant. Grant me
torrents of tears, O most Pure One, to cleanse my soul from impurity. I
offer the groans of my heart to Thee unceasingly. Strive for me, O
Sovereign Lady. Accept my service of supplication and offer it to
compassionate God. O thou who art above the Angels, raise me above this
world's confusion. O Light-bearing heavenly Tabernacle, direct the grace
of the Spirit in me. I raise my hands and lips in thy praise, defiled as
they are by impurity, O All-Immaculate One. Deliver me from
soul-corrupting evils, and fervently intercede to Christ to Whom is due
honour with adoration, now and ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ

My most merciful and all-merciful God, Lord Jesus Christ, through Thy
great love Thou didst come down and take flesh to save all. And again, O
Saviour, save me by Thy grace, I pray Thee, for if Thou shouldst save me
for my works, this would not be grace or a gift, but rather a duty.
Indeed, in Thy infinite compassion and unspeakable mercy, Thou O my
Christ hast said: Whoever believes in Me shall live and never see death.
If faith in Thee saves the desperate, save me, for Thou art my God and
Creator. Impute my faith instead of deeds, O my God, for Thou wilt find
no deeds which could justify me, but may my faith suffice for all my
deeds. May it answer for and acquit me, and may it make me a partaker of
Thy eternal glory. And may satan not seize me, O Word, and boast that he
has torn me from Thy hand and fold. O Christ, my Saviour, whether I will
or not, save me. Make haste, quick, quick, for I perish. Thou art my God
from my mother's womb. Grant me, O Lord, to love Thee now as once I
loved sin, and also to work for Thee without idleness, as I worked
before for deceptive satan. But supremely shall I work for Thee, my Lord
and God, Jesus Christ, all the days of my life, now and ever, and to the
ages of ages. Amen.

Prayer to the Guardian Angel of Human Life

O Holy Angel, interceding for my wretched soul and my passionate life,
forsake me not, a sinner, nor shrink from me for my intemperance. Give
no place for the subtle demon to master me through the violence of my
mortal body. Strengthen my poor and feeble hand, and guide me in the way
of salvation. O holy Angel of God, guardian and protector of my wretched
body and soul, forgive me for all the insults I have given thee every
day of my life, and for whatever sins I may have committed during the
past night. Protect me during the present day, and guard me from every
temptation of the enemy, that I may not anger God by any sin. And pray
to the Lord for me, that He may strengthen me in His fear, and make me,
His slave, worthy of His goodness. Amen.

Prayer to the Most Holy Mother of God

My most holy Lady, Mother of God, by thy holy and all-powerful prayers
banish from me, thy humble, wretched servant, despondency,
forgetfulness, folly, carelessness, and all impure, evil and blasphemous
thoughts out of my wretched heart and my darkened mind. And quench the
flame of my passions, for I am poor and wretched, and deliver me from my
many cruel memories and deeds, and free me from all their bad effects;
for blessed art thou by all generations, and glorified is thy most
honorable name to the ages of ages. Amen.

Prayers to the Mother of God

Virgin Mother of God, rejoice, Mary full of grace; the Lord is with
thee. Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy
womb, for thou hast borne the Saviour of our souls. Under thy tender
compassion we run, O Mother of God, reject not our prayer in our
trouble, but deliver us from harm, only pure, only blessed one. Most
glorious Ever-Virgin, Mother of Christ our God, present our prayer to
thy Son and our God and pray that through thee He may save our souls.

Prayer for Intercession to the Angelic Hosts

O Heavenly Hosts of holy Angels and Archangels, pray for us sinners.
Prayer for Intercession to all Saints O glorious Apostles, Prophets and
Martyrs, and all Saints, pray for us sinners. Prayerful Invocation to
the Saint whose Name we bear Pray for me Saint.... (name), for with
fervour I come to thee, speedy helper and intercessor for my soul.

The Troparion to the Cross

O Lord, save Thy people and bless Thine inheritance. Grant victory over
all enemies to Orthodox Christians and protect Thy people with Thy
Cross.

It is truly meet and right to bless thee, the Ever-Blessed and Most Pure
Virgin and Mother of our God. More honourable than the Cherubim, and
incomparably more glorious than the Seraphim, thou who in virginity
didst bear God the Word, thee, true Mother of God, we magnify.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and
ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy. (3 times)

God be gracious to us and bless us, and shine Thy countenance upon us
and have mercy upon us.

This is the day which the Lord has made; let us rejoice and be glad in
it.

INTERCESSION Commemoration of the Living and Departed

Remember, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, Thy mercies and bounties which
are from all eternity, and through which Thou didst become man and didst
will to suffer crucifixion and death for the salvation of those who
rightly believe in Thee, and having risen from the dead didst ascend
into heaven, and sittest at the right hand of God the Father and
regardest the humble entreaties of those who call upon Thee with all
their heart: incline Thy ear, and hear the humble prayer of me, Thy
worthless servant, as the fragrance of spiritual incense, which I offer
to Thee for all people. And first remember Thy Holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church, which Thou hast provided through Thy Precious Blood.
Confirm, strengthen, extend, and increase her, and keep her in peace,
and for ever proof against the power of hell. Calm the dissensions of
the Churches, and foil the plans of the powers of darkness, dispel the
prejudice of the nations, and quickly ruin and root out the risings of
heresy, and frustrate them by the power of the Holy Spirit. Bow. Save, O
Lord, and have mercy on our president and all in authority throughout
the world, commanders-in-chief of armies and navies and airfleets,
governors of provinces and cities, and all the Christ-loving navies,
armies and police; protect their power with peace, and subdue under
their feet every enemy and foe, and speak peace and blessing in their
hearts for Thy Holy Church, and for all Thy people, and grant that in
their calm we too may lead a quiet and peaceful life in true belief, in
all piety and honesty. Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy on Orthodox Patriarchs, Metropolitans,
Archbishops and Bishops, the Priests and Deacons, and all who serve in
the Church, and whom Thou hast ordained to feed Thy spiritual flock; and
by their prayers, have mercy on me, a sinner. Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy on our father (parish priest or abbot of
monastery), with all his brethren in Christ, and by their prayers have
mercy on me, wretch that I am. Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy on my Spiritual Father (name) and by his
prayers forgive me my sins. Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy on all workers in this holy community, our
brethren and all manual workers, and lay-workers, and farm labourers of
this monastery, and all Christians. Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy on my parents (names), my brothers and
sisters and all my relatives, and the neighbours of my family, and
friends - and grant them Thy worldly and spiritual goods. Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy according to the multitude of Thy bounties,
on all priests, monks and nuns, and on all living in virginity, devotion
and fasting, in monasteries, in deserts, in caves, on mountains, on
pillars, in hermitages, in the clefts of rocks, and right faith in every
place of Thy dominion, and devoutly serving Thee, and praying to Thee.
Lighten their burden, console them in their afflictions, and grant them
strength, power and perseverance in their struggle, and by their prayers
grant me remission of sins. Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy on the old and the young, the poor and
destitute, the orphans and widows, the leper colonies, epileptics and
spastics, and those in sickness and sorrow, misfortune and tribulation,
captives and exiles, in mines and prisons and reformatories, and
especially on those of Thy servants suffering persecution for Thy sake
and for the Orthodox Faith from godless peoples, apostates and heretics.
Visit, strengthen, comfort, and heal them, and by Thy power quickly
grant them relief, freedom and deliverance. Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy on our benefactors, who have mercy on us
and feed us, and relieve us of anxiety by giving us alms, and entrust
us, unworthy as we are, to pray for them; and give them Thy grace, and
grant them all their requests which conduce to salvation, and the
attainment of eternal joy. Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy on the Fathers and Sisters, and our
Brotherhood, and on all Orthodox Christians who are messengers and
missionaries in Thy service, and are travelling. Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy on those whom I have offended or
scandalized by my madness or inadvertence, and whom I have turned from
the way of salvation, and whom I have led into evil and harmful deeds.
By Thy divine providence restore them again to the way of salvation.
Bow.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy on those who hate and offend me, and do me
harm, and let them not perish through me, a sinner. Bow.

Illumine with the light of grace all apostates from the Orthodox Faith,
and those blinded by pernicious heresies, and draw them to Thyself, and
unite them to Thy Holy, Apostolic, Catholic Church. Bow.

For Those Departed in Sleep Remember, O Lord, those who have departed
from this life, Orthodox kings and queens, princes and princesses,
Orthodox Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops and Bishops, Priests and
Deacons and those who have served Thee in the Monastic State, and the
laity of the Church, and the blessed founders of all Churches and
monasteries, and grant them rest with the Saints in Thy eternal
dwellings. Bow.

Prayer of Rememberance for Parents Departed in Sleep

Remember, O Lord, the souls of Thy servants who have departed in sleep,
my parents (names), and all my relatives according to the flesh; forgive
them every transgression, voluntary and involuntary; grant them the
Kingdom and a part in Thy eternal joys, and the delight of Thy blessed
and everlasting life. Bow.

Prayer for Monastery Brotherhood

Remember, O Lord, also all Fathers and Sisters and members of our
Brotherhood who have departed in sleep with the hope of resurrection and
eternal life, and all Orthodox Christians who lie here and in all the
world, and with Thy Saints give them repose where the light of Thy Face
shines and have mercy on us, for Thou art good and the Lover of men.
Amen. Bow.

At the end, say three times: Grant, O Lord, remission of all sins to our
Fathers, Brothers and Sisters departed in the faith and hope of
resurrection, and grant them memory eternal.